  Lecture 4
M IXTUR ES OF E XPERTS


        CS336
       Tatsu H
Mixture of experts




GPT4 (?)
What’s a MoE?




                                                                         [Fedus et al 2022]

 Replace big feedforward with (many) big feedforward networks and a selector layer

              You can increase the # experts without affecting FLOPs
Why are MoEs getting popular?
Same FLOP, more param does better




                                    [Fedus et al 2022]
Why are MoEs getting popular?
Faster to train MoEs




                                [OlMoE]
Why are MoEs getting popular?




Highly competitive vs dense equivalents
Why are MoEs getting popular?
Parallelizable to many devices
Some MoE results – from the west




 MoEs are most of the highest-performance open models, and are quite quick
Earlier MoE results from Chinese groups – Qwen
Chinese LLM companies are also doing quite a bit of MoE work on the smaller end
Earlier MoE results from Chinese groups - DeepSeek
There’s also some good recent ablation work on MoEs showing they’re generally good
Recent MoE results – DeepSeek v3
Why haven’t MoEs been more popular?
Infrastructure is complex / advantages on multi node




                                                                      [Fedus et al 2022]
Training objectives are somewhat heuristic (and sometimes unstable)




                                                                       [Zoph et al 2022]
What MoEs generally look like

Typical: replace MLP with MoE layer   Less common: MoE for attention heads




                                                          [ModuleFormer, JetMoE]
MoE – what varies?


❖ Routing function



❖ Expert sizes



❖ Training objectives
Routing function - overview
Many of the routing algorithms boil down to ‘choose top k’




         Token chooses           Expert chooses       Global routing via
            expert                   token              optimization
                                                                           [Fedus et al 2022]
Routing type
Almost all the MoEs do a standard ‘token choice topk’ routing. Some recent ablations
        Common routing variants in detail
                                        Used in most MoEs

                                        Switch Transformer (k=1)
Top-k                                   Gshard (k=2), Grok (2), Mixtral (2),
                                        Qwen (4), DBRX (4),
                                        DeepSeek (7)




Hashing                                 Common baseline

                                                                 [Fedus et al 2022]
        Other routing methods



RL to learn routes              Used in some of the earliest work
                                Bengio 2013, not common now




Solve a matching                Linear assignment for routing
    problem                     Used in various papers like Clark ‘22

                                                      [Fedus et al 2022]
    Top-K routing in detail.
    Most papers do the old and classic top-k routing. How does this work?

           Gating
                                                               This is the
                                                               DeepSeek (V1-2) router
                                                               (Grok, Qwen do this too)



                                                               Mixtral, DBRX,
                                                               DeepSeek v3
                                                               softmaxes after the
                                                               TopK

Gates selected by a logistic regressor                                           [Dai et al 2024]
Recent variations from DeepSeek and other Chinese LMs




   Smaller, larger number of experts + a few shared experts that are always on.

                                              (Used in DeepSeek / Qwen, originally from DeepSpeed MoE)
Various ablations from the DeepSeek paper




More experts, shared experts all seem to generally help
Ablations from OlMoE
Gains from fine-grained experts, none from shared experts.
Expert routing setups for recent MoEs
Model                Routed   Active   Shared   Fine-grained ratio
GShard               2048     2        0
Switch Transformer   64       1        0
ST-MOE               64       2        0
Mixtral              8        2        0
DBRX                 16       4        0
Grok                 8        2        0
DeepSeek v1          64       6        2        1/4
Qwen 1.5             60       4        4        1/8
DeepSeek v3          256      8        1        1/14
OlMoE                64       8        0        1/8
MiniMax              32       2        0        ~1/4
Llama 4 (maverick)   128      1        1        1/2
How do we train MoEs?
Major challenge: we need sparsity for training-time efficiency…
                  But sparse gating decisions are not differentiable!

Solutions?

1. Reinforcment learning to optimize gating policies
2. Stochastic perturbations
3. Heuristic ‘balancing’ losses.



                     Guess which one people use in practice?
RL for MoEs
RL via REINFORCE does work, but not so much better that it’s a clear win




(REINFORCE baseline approach, Clark et al 2020)



               RL is the ‘right solution’ but gradient variances and complexity
                                     means it’s not widely used
Stochastic approximations




From Shazeer et al 2017 – routing decisions are stochastic with gaussian perturbations.

1. This naturally leads to experts that are a bit more robust.
2. The softmax means that the model learns how to rank K experts
   Stochastic approximations




Stochastic jitter in Fedus et al 2022. This does a uniform multiplicative perturbation for the
    same goal of getting less brittle experts. This was later removed in Zoph et al 2022
Heuristic balancing losses
Another key issue – systems efficiency requires that we use experts evenly..




                                                                               From the Switch Transformer [Fedus et al 2022]
                                                       𝛼𝑁
               The derivative with respect to 𝑝𝑖 (𝑥) is 2 σ 1𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑝 𝑥 =𝑖 ,
                                                       𝑇
                      so more frequent use = stronger downweighting
Example from deepseek (v1-2)
Per-expert balancing – same as the switch transformer




Per-device balancing – the objective above, but aggregated by device.
DeepSeek v3 variation – per-expert biases
Set up a per-expert bias (making it more likely to get tokens) and use online learning




They call this ‘auxiliary loss free balancing’




(but the approach is not fully aux loss free..)
What happens when removing load balancing losses?
  Training MoEs – the systems side

MoEs parallelize nicely – Each FFN   Enables additional kinds of parallelism
         can fit in a device
Training MoEs – the systems side
MoE routing allows for parallelism, but also some complexities




Modern libraries like MegaBlocks (used in many open MoEs) use smarter sparse MMs
Fun side issue – stochasticity of MoE models
There was speculation that GPT-4’s stochasticity was due to MoE..

Why would a MoE have additional randomness?




     Token dropping from routing happens at a batch level – this means that
                   other people’s queries can drop your token!
  Issues with MoEs - stability




                                                                                   [Zoph 2022]



Solution: Use Float 32 just for the expert router (sometimes with an aux z-loss)
Z-loss stability for the router




What happens when we remove the z-loss?
     Issues with MoEs – fine-tuning
                         Sparse MoEs can overfit on smaller fine-tuning data




Zoph et al solution – finetune non-MoE MLPs             DeepSeek solution – use lots of data 1.4M SFT
Other training methods - upcycling




Can we use a pre-trained LM to initialize a MoE?
Upcycling example - MiniCPM
Uses the MiniCPM model (topk=2, 8 experts, ~ 4B active params).




Simple MoE, shows gains from the base model with ~ 520B tokens for training
    Upcycling example – Qwen MoE
    Qwen MoE – Initialized from the Qwen 1.8B model top-k=4, 60 experts w/ 4 shared.




Similar architecture / setup to DeepSeekMoE, but one of the first (confirmed) upcycling successes
DeepSeek MoE v1-v2-v3
To wrap up, we’ll walk through the DeepSeek MoE architecture.
V1 (16B – 2.8 active):
                               Shared (2) + Fine-grained (64/4) experts




     Standard, top-k routing                        Standard Aux-loss balancing (Expert + Device)
DeepSeek MoE v2
V2 (236B – 21 active):
                                     Shared (2) + Fine-grained (160/10) experts, 6 active




New things:

              Top-M device routing                   Communication balancing loss – balancing both communication in and out
DeepSeek MoE v3
V2 (671B – 37 active):
                         Shared (1) + Fine-grained (258) experts, 8 active




New things

        Sigmoid+Softmax topK + topM                                 Aux-loss-free + seq-wise aux
Bonus: What else do you need to make DeepSeek MoE v3?
MLA : Multihead, latent attention




Basic idea: express the Q, K, V as functions of a lower-dim, ‘latent’ activation
What else do you need to make DeepSeek MoE v3?
Basic idea: express the Q, K, V as functions of a lower-dim, ‘latent’ activation




Benefits: when KV-caching, we only need to store 𝑐𝑡𝐾𝑉 , which can be much smaller.
   𝑊 𝑈𝐾 can be merged into the Q projection

                         (they also compress queries, for memory savings during training)


Complexity: rope conflicts with MLA-style caching.
    Without RoPE – 𝑄, 𝐾 = ℎ𝑊 𝑄 , 𝑊 𝑈𝐾 𝑐𝑡𝐾𝑉 = ⟨ℎ 𝑊 𝑄 𝑊 𝑈𝐾 , 𝑐𝑡𝐾𝑉 ⟩
    With RoPE - 𝑄𝑅𝑞 , 𝑅𝑘 𝐾 = ℎ𝑊 𝑄 𝑅𝑞 , 𝑅𝑘 𝑊 𝑈𝐾 𝑐𝑡𝐾𝑉 = ℎ 𝑊 𝑄 𝑅𝑞 𝑅𝑘 𝑊 𝑈𝐾 , 𝑐𝑡𝐾𝑉
              The solution – Have a few non-latent key dimensions that can be rotated
What else do you need to make DeepSeek MoE v3?
MTP: Have small, lightweight models that predict multiple steps ahead




(But they only do MTP with one token ahead)
                                              [Deepseek v3]                           [EAGLE]




                                                                   (See paper for ablations)
MoE summary



 ❖ MoEs take advantage of sparsity – not all inputs need the full model



     ❖ Discrete routing is hard, but top-k heuristics seem to work



❖ Lots of empirical evidence now that MoEs work, and are cost-effective
