Lecture 5
  GPUS


  CS336
  Tatsu H
Outline and goals

                                ❖ Make CUDA and GPUs less magic

 Understand when GPUs get slow                                              Understand how to make fast algorithms




       http s://www.thonking.ai/p/what-shapes-do-mat rix-multiplicat ions                                Dao et al, Flash At ten tion
Before we start..
Substantial credit goes to a few sources that I’d like to highlight..




           Horace He’s blog                                                   CUDA Mode group


                  And other sources including https://nichijou.co/, https://jonathan-hui.medium.com/
Organization today:


     ❖ Part 1: GPUs in depth – how they work and important parts



             ❖ Part 2: Understanding GPU performance



       ❖ Part 3: Putting it together – unpacking FlashAttention
      Setting the stage: compute leads to predictable perf
  Often times, compute leads to predictable performance gains for language models




                                                                     Kaplan et al, Neural Scalin g Laws



Faster hardware, better utilization, improved parallelization alone can drive progress (for now..)
How do we get compute scaling? Early on – Dennard scaing




But the traditional form of scaling (Dennard scaling) from 1980-2000s has tapped out.
.. How do we feed LLMs’ insatiable appetite for compute?
Parallel scaling continues




                                                                       Bill dally, HotChips keynote



          Parallel scaling with GPUs has scaled > 1000x in 10 years.
                 There is no LLM scaling without GPU scaling
How is a GPU different from a CPU?

CPUs optimize for a few, fast threads while GPUs optimize for many many threads




   Many tiny compute units (ALUs).                            CPUs optimize for latency (each thread finishes quickly)
   Much less support for branching (control, cache)           GPUs optimize for throughput (total processed data)


                                                      https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/cuda-refresher-reviewing-the-origins-of-gpu-computing/
Anatomy of a GPU (execution units)




Each SM further contains many SPs    GPUs have many SM (streaming
    (streaming processor) that can   multiprocessors) that independently
    execute ‘threads’ in parallel    execute ‘blocks’ (jobs).
  Anatomy of a GPU (memory)
The closer the memory to the SM, the faster it is – L1 and shared memory is inside
the SM. L2 cache is on die, and global memory are the memory chips next to the GPU




     SRAM (shared/cache memory) is much more expensive (100x) but ~ 8x faster than DRAM (Global memory)
  Execution model of a GPU




There are 3 important players in the execution model
Threads: Threads ‘do the work’ in parallel – all threads execute the same instructions but with
    different inputs (SIMT).
Blocks: Blocks are groups of threads. Each block runs on a SM w/ its own shared memory.
Warp: Threads always execute in a ‘warp’ of 32 consecutively numbered threads each.
  Memory model of a GPU




Each thread can access its own register, and shared memory within the block.
Information that goes across blocks need to be read/written to global memory (slow)
Side thread – What about TPUs?
GPUs, TPUs, and many other accelerators are at a high level, similar




                                                                         A GPU has more SMs
                                                                          TPUs has fewer TCs
                                                                       (but similar matmul perf)




   Core structure – lightweight control, fast (big) matmul unit, fast memory.
  Differences - how the accelerators are networked (in the parallelism lecture)
              - no warps (just blocks – tradeoffs in matmul vs non-matmul)
Strengths of the GPU model
❖ Easily scales up hard workloads (by adding more SMs)

❖ Easy (?) to program due to the SIMT model




❖ Threads are ‘lightweight’ and can be stopped and started
GPUs as fast matrix multipliers




Early days of NVIDIA GPUs – programmable shaders. Researchers hacked this to do matmuls
New matmul hardware means matmuls are fast and special




Tensor cores (introduced in V, T series) are specialized matrix multiplication circuits.
             Matmuls are >10x faster than other floating point ops!
Compute scaling is faster than memory scaling




                                                     https://medium.com/riselab/ai-and-memory-wall-2cb4265cb0b8




 FLOPs scale faster than memory – it’s hard to keep our compute units fed with data!
Recap: GPUs – what are they and how do they work

❖ GPUs are massively parallel – same instructions
  applied across many workers




❖ Compute (and esp matmuls) have scaled faster
  than memory




❖ We have to respect the memory hierarchy to
  make things go fast.
Part 2: Making ML workloads fast on a GPU




Performance on a GPU can be complex, even for something as simple as a square matmul
What makes ML workloads fast?
The roofline model




Key to this section: how do we avoid being memory bound?
How do we make GPUs go fast?

1. Control divergence (not a memory bottleneck..)

2. Low precision computation

3. Operator fusion

4. Recomputation

5. Coalescing memory

6. Tiling
Control divergence (not a memory issue)
GPUs operate in a SIMT model – every thread in a warp is executing the same instruction




Conditionals are fine, but lead to significant overhead from the execution model
Trick 1: Low precision computation




If you have fewer bits, you have fewer bits to move
Low precision improves arithmetic intensity
Example: elementwise ReLU (𝑥 = max(0, 𝑥)) on a vector of size 𝑛.

(Float 32 case)
Memory access: 1 read (x), 1 write (if x < 0), float 32 = 8 bytes
Operations: 1 comparison op, 1 FLOP.
Intensity: 8 bytes / FLOP



(Float 16)
Memory access: 1 read (x), 1 write (if x < 0), float 16 = 4 bytes
Operations: 1 comparison op, 1 FLOP.
Intensity: 4 bytes / FLOP
 Low precision drives faster matrix multiplies

Lots of operations in modern GPUs are accelerated via low / mixed precision operations



               Tensor cores




                              https://nvlabs.github.io/eccv2020-mixed-precision-tutorial/files/dusan_stosic-training-neural-networks-with-tensor-cores.pdf
Trick 2: Operator fusion
Think of a GPU like a factory – inputs come from a warehouse (memory) and is
    processed at a factory




                          Compute scales up, memory doesn’t


                                                                        https://horace.io/brrr_intro.html
Operator fusion to minimize memory access
What if we have to do many operations? Shipping back and forth is somewhat silly




          Naïve (non-fused)                            Fused kernel
Example – sines and cosines




Computing sin2 𝑥 + cos 2 𝑥 naively launches 5 CUDA kernels (back and forth)


                    https://towardsdatascience.com/how-pytorch-2-0-accelerates-deep-learning-with-operator-fusion-and-cpu-gpu-code-generation-35132a85bd26
Fusion example




       All 5 pointwise operations can be fused into a single CUDA kernel call.
   ‘Easy’ fusions like this can be done automatically by compilers ( torch.compile)
Trick 3: recomputation




                                                                   [From cs221]



In backpropagation, we store the activations (yellow) and compute Jacobians (green)
Storing (and retrieving) activations can be expensive!
Let’s say we stack 3 sigmoids on top of each other.




 This is really terrible for perf – 8 mem read/writes, very low arithmetic intensity.
                                    https://dev-discuss.pytorch.org/t/min-cut-optimal-recomputation-i-e-activation-checkpointing-with-aotautograd/467
Throw away the activations, re-compute them!




Throwing away computation can actually be optimal, w/ 5/8th the memory accesses!

                                 https://dev-discuss.pytorch.org/t/min-cut-optimal-recomputation-i-e-activation-checkpointing-with-aotautograd/467
Trick (?) 4: Memory coalescing and DRAM
DRAM (global memory) is read in ‘burst mode’ – each read gives you many bytes!




                                                             [https://blog.csdn.net/xll_bit/article/details/117702476]




            Burst mode comes from the slow per-row copy to the sense amplifier
                                                                    [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9BjVUmaXaCQ]
Memory coalescing
Memory accesses are coalesced if all the threads (in a warp) fall within the same burst




                              Reminder: a warp is a set of 32 consecutively
                              numbered threads that execute together in a
                              block. Memory accesses happen together
Coalescing for matrix multiplication




    For row-major matrices – threads that move along rows are not coalesced
            Note how the second diagram reads the entire vector at each step!
Trick 5 (the big one): tiling
Tiling is the idea of grouping and ordering threads to minimize global memory access.


   Let’s go back to matrix multiplication..




   Note that memory access is not coalesced, and repeated (M0,0 and N1,0)
Tiling – store and reuse information in shared memory
Cut up the matrix into smaller ‘tiles’, and load this into shared memory



                                           Compute the matrix multiply in ‘phases’
                                           1. Load 𝑀0,0 and 𝑁0,0 tiles into SHM
                                           2. Compute partial sums for 𝑃
                                                   (Done with one tile)
                                           3. Load the 𝑀0,0 and 𝑁2,0 tile into SHM
                                           4. …




         Advantages: repeated reads now access shared, not global memory
             and memory access can be coalesced
Tiling math




Non-tiled matrix multiply: each input is read 𝑁 times from global memory
                                        𝑁
Tiled matrix multiply: each input is read times from global memory, and 𝑇 times
                                              𝑇
    within each tile. This is a factor of 𝑇 reduction in global memory access
Complexities with tiling
Tile sizes may not divide the matrix size and lead to low utilization




Factors affecting tile sizes
• Coalesced memory access
• Shared memory size
• Divisibility of the matrix dim
                                   https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/performance/dl-performance-matrix-multiplication/index.html#tile-quant
   Complexities with tiling 2 – memory alignment

Memory comes in bursts




Loading tiles are fast if
bursts align with the matrix



                                                                    https://www.thonking.ai/p/what-shapes-do-matrix-multiplications




Coalesced accesses may be impossible depending on the dimension of the matrix..
                                (have to do padding)
Putting it together: understanding a matrix mystery




                Why is it faster to have bigger matrices?



                                         This section is from https://www.thonking.ai/p/what-shapes-do-matrix-multiplications
Matrix mystery




We understand some of this (compute intensity, tiling). Let’s take a closer look..
Part 1: tiling




                 Tiling has a major impact through alignment.
Part 2: wave quantization
                 What’s with the periodic behavior?


                      This happens at 1792 to 1793 size.

                      Why? Using a tile size of 256 × 128, there are
                                    1792 1792
                                          ×        = 7 × 14 = 98
                                     256     128
                      tiles. If we increase this to 1793, we have
                                            8 × 15 = 120
                      tiles.

                      An A100 has 108 SMs, so it cannot execute all 120
Recap of part 2: making ML workloads go fast

❖ Reduce memory accesses
   ❖Coalescing
   ❖Fusion

❖ Move memory to shared memory
   ❖Tiling



❖ Trade memory for compute/accuracy
   ❖Quantization
   ❖Recomputation
Part 3: Using what we know to understand Flash Attention
Flash attention [Dao et al] dramatically accelerates attention.. But how?




Technique from paper:
Recap of attention computation
Attention computation: 3 matrix multiplies (K, Q, V) with a softmax in between
Tiling part 1: tiling for the KQV matrix multiply




This figure 1 from the paper is literally just tiling for a KQV matrix multiply..
                         But what do we do about the softmax?
Tiling part 2: incremental computation of the softmax
From Mikailov and Gimelshein 2018,

           Normal softmax
                                                       Online softmax




 To keep track of the max, incrementally update the max, and set up a telescoping sum
                     This lets you compute the softmax tile-by-tile
Putting it all together – the forward pass of flash attention




From Dao 2023, we see
• Tile-wise computation of the inner products, (𝑆)
• Fusion of the exponential operator
• Tile-wise computation of the softmax via the online, telescoping sum trick
           (We won’t cover the backward pass – but they recompute tile-by-tile..)
Recap for the whole lecture

❖ Hardware powers scale, and low-level details
  determine what scales or doesnt




❖ Curent GPU based compute strongly
  encourages thinking about matmul + data
  movement




❖ Thinking carefully about the GPU (coalescing,
  tiling, fusion) leads us to good performance
