  Lecture 7
PA R A L L E L I S M B A S I C S


           CS336
           Tatsu H
Outline and goals


•   Understand the systems complexities of training huge models



•   Different parallelization paradigms and why people use multiple at once



•   What large scale training runs often look like
Organization today:


               ❖ Part 1: Basics of networking for LLMs



          ❖ Part 2: Different forms of parallel LLM training



        ❖ Part 3: Scaling and training big LMs with parallelism
Limits to GPU-based scaling – compute




There are limits to single-GPU scaling.
   The word’s fastest supercomputers have exaflops of compute
Limits to GPU-based scaling - memory
Models are getting really big..




                   A single GPU can’t fit most of these large models!
What do we do? Multi-GPU, multi-machine parallelism
    Intra-node parallelism
                                        High-speed inter-node parallelism
   via high-speed interconnects




       Split up memory and compute requirements across GPUs and machines
But first.. Some basics about collective communication
                              Reduce
All reduce



                              All Gather

Broadcast


                              Reduce Scatter
Important detail – all reduce vs reduce-scatter-gather.
Reduce can be implemented as two steps: reduce-scatter and all-gather




Importantly, in the bandwidth-limited regime, this is the best you can do
TPUs vs GPUs – design differences at the comm level


  TPU networking
   toroidal mesh




  GPU networking
 All-to-all (up to 256)
Part 1 recap


❖ New unit of compute – the datacenter

❖ What we want from multi-machine scaling:
   ❖Linear memory scaling (max model params scales with num gpus)
   ❖Linear compute scaling (model flops scale linearly with num gpus)

❖ Simple collective comms primitives
Part 2 – Standard LLM parallelization primitives

How do we parallelize LLMs? 3 important ideas

•    Data parallelism
     • Naïve data parallel
     • ZeRO levels 1-3

•    Model parallelism
     • Pipeline parallel
     • Tensor parallel

•   Activation parallelism
    • Sequence parallel
Naïve data parallelism
Starting point – imagine we are doing naïve SGD

                                                  𝐵
                                   𝜃𝑡+1 = 𝜃𝑡 − 𝜂 ෍ ∇𝑓(𝑥𝑖 )
                                                  𝑖=1


Naive parallelism: split the elements of B sized batch across M machines. Exchange gradients to
    synchronize




How does this do?
   Compute scaling – each GPU gets B/M examples.
   Communication overhead – transmits 2x # params every batch. OK if batches are big
   Memory scaling – none. Every GPU needs # params at least
What’s wrong with naïve data parallel?




Memory seems like it’d be a problem – we copy the model parameters to each GPU.
                             Let’s take a closer look..
What’s wrong with naïve data parallelism? - Memory
Our memory situation is actually terrible.

Depending on our precision..

                 We need 5 copies of weights and 16 bytes per param!

-   2 bytes for FP/BF 16 model parameters
-   2 bytes for FP/BF 16 gradients
-   4 bytes for FP32 master weights (the thing you accumulate into in SGD)
-   4 (or 2) bytes for FP32/BF16 Adam first moment estimates                 “Optimizer state”
-   4 (or 2) bytes for FP32/BF16 Adam second moment estimates
ZeRO – solving the memory overhead issue of DP
Core idea: split up the expensive parts (state) and use the reduce-scatter equivalence.
ZeRO stage 1. optimizer state sharding




High level idea:
• Split up the optimizer state (first + second moments) across GPUs
• Everyone has the parameters + gradients

Each worker is responsible for updating a subset of params (corresponding to their slice)
ZeRO stage 1. how it works

Step 1. Everyone computes a full gradient on their subset of the batch

Step 2. ReduceScatter the gradients – incur #params communication cost




Step 3. Each machine updates their param using their gradient + state.
Step 4. All Gather the parameters – incur #params communication cost
Comparing ZeRO stage 1 and naïve data parallel


                         Naïve DDP                 ZeRO stage 1
Communication            One all-reduce            One reduce scatter (send
primitive                (gradients)               gradients) + all gather
                                                   (collect params)
Communication cost       2* # params               2* # params
Memory                   (4+K) * #params           (4+K/Ngpu) * #params


  ZeRO stage 1 is free (in the bandwidth limited regime) memory wins
ZeRO stage 2. the simple extension to gradient sharding




                Emboldened by our success, let’s shard even more stuff

High level idea
• Also keep the gradients (pink slices) sharded across the machines.
• Use the same (rough) tricks as stage 1.

Complexity – we can never instantiate a full gradient vector, but each worker must
   compute a full gradient (since we’re data parallel)
ZeRO stage 2. how it works
Step 1. Everyone incrementally goes backward on the computation graph
   Step 1a. After computing a layer’s gradients, immediately reduce to send this to the
   right worker




   Step 1b. Once gradients are not needed in the backward graph, immediately free it.
Step 2. Each machine updates their param using their gradient + state.
Step 3. All Gather the parameters.
ZeRO stage 3 (aka FSDP) shard everything




We’ve gotten almost everything for free so far.. lets try to solve all our memory issues

High level idea
• Shard everything – incl parameters!
• Use the same ‘incremental communication / computation’ ideas
• Send and request parameters on demand while stepping through the compute graph.

                          Is it possible to do this with low overhead?
ZeRO stage 3 (aka FSDP) how it works (baby version)




   Communication cost – 2 all gather (#param), 1 reduce-scatter (#param).
                                 https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/FSDP_tutorial.html
Actual picture of how FDSP / ZeRO stage 3 works
Let’s walk through a FSDP example to see some important ideas

Incremental computation / communication
• Parameters / gradients are requested / sent and then immediately freed

Overlapping communication and computation (𝑾𝟏 𝑾𝟎 + 𝑾𝟐 𝑾𝟎 )𝒙 = 𝒚
• The all-gathers happen all at once while forward happens, masking the comm cost.




                                                                https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.11277.pdf
What’s the point?
Distributed data parallel costs 2*# param communication

What about ZeRO?

•   Zero stage 1 is 2*# param – it’s free! – you might as well always do it

•   Zero stage 2 is 2*# param – it’s (almost) free (ignoring overhead)

•   Zero stage 3 is 3*# param – 1.5x comm cost, but that’s not bad! (ignoring latency..)



This is also conceptually very simple – write a FSDP block wrapper.
ZeRO in practice: will it fit?
Pure BF16 training (with Kahan summation), is viable and optimizer states are less
   beefy. Let’s say BF16 for everything but the master weights – 12 bytes per param

On a 8X A100 80G..


                             Max size (params)          Formula for B/param
  Baseline                   6.66.. B                   12
  Zero stage 1               16 B                       5
  Zero stage 2               24.62 B                    2 (param) + (10
                                                        (grad+state))/8)
  Zero stage 3               53.33 B                    12/8
Issues remain with data parallel – compute scaling
With data parallel, #machines < batch size (and near this, comm overhead is high)

And there’s diminishing returns to batch sizes
Issues remain with data parallel – models don’t fit
Zero stages 1 and 2 don’t let you scale memory
Zero stage 3 is nice in principle, but can be slow and does not reduce activation memory




Better ways to split up the model is needed…
Beyond data parallel – model parallelism
Scaling up in memory (without changing batch size) with model parallelism

What model parallelism is..
   • It splits up the parameters across GPUs (like zero3)..
   • But communicate activations (while zero3 sends params).


We cover two different types of parallelism

   1. Pipeline parallel
   2. Tensor parallel (+ Sequence parallel)

These correspond to two different ways of cutting up the model.
Layer-wise parallel




Layer-wise parallel cuts up layers, assigns some subset to GPUS.
Activations and partial gradients are passed back and forth
What’s wrong with layer-wise parallel
Utilization of layer-wise parallelism is terrible..

                                                      1
                      With n gpus, each gpu is active of the time.
                                                      n




Each GPU is idling most of the time, waiting for the backward pass to propagate back
A solution: pipeline parallel




Solution: Pipeline-parallel.
                        Process ‘micro-batches’ (in this case, 4).
             Send off the first microbatch and start computing the second.


                                                   𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑠 −1
The ratio of bubble time to useful compute is ..                so we need a big batch size!
                                                    𝑛𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜
Why pipeline parallel?
Pipelines seem terrible. Why do we do it?



1. Pipelines save memory (compared to DDP)

2. Pipelines can have good communication properties (compared to FDSP) – it
   depends only on activations (𝑏 × 𝑠 × ℎ) and is point to point



Generally, we will use pipelines on slower network links (i.e. inter-node) as a way to get
   better memory-wise scaling.
Pipeline performance is highly dependent on batch size




Batch sizes are key to hiding the bubble – otherwise pipeline rapidly degrades perf
Trading communication bandwidth for utilization




Some more crazy pipeline patterns can improve utilization, but at the cost of bandwidth
‘Zero bubble’ pipelining

Split up backwards into two parts
1. Backpropagating activations (z,x)
2. Computing weight gradients (W)

The second part can be done whenever
  Model parallel along the width axes
  Are there model parallel schemes with better utilization?
  We can think of pipeline parallel as cutting up along depth. What about width?




Simple matrix multiplication observation: decompose into submatrices, add partial sums
Tensor parallel – GPUs have submatrices




Assign columns (A1, A2) and rows (B1, B2) to separate GPUs.
• In the forward pass, f is the identity, and g is an all-reduce.
• In the backward pass, f is an all-reduce, g is the identity.
When do we tensor parallel?
On GPUs, tensor parallel within a node (up to 8 GPUs) due to high speed interconnects.
Tensor parallel – pros and cons vs pipeline parallel
How do things compare to pipeline parallel?

    Pros – no bubble. If your network is fast enough, there’s no waiting for others.
         – low complexity – simple to ‘wrap’ models without major infra changes
         – doesn’t need large batch sizes to work well

    Cons – much larger communication than pipeline parallel.
        •   Pipeline: 𝑏𝑠ℎ point-to-point communication per microbatch
                           𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠−1
        •   Tensor: 8𝑏𝑠ℎ                per layer and all-reduce communication.
                            𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠




   Use tensor parallel whenever we have low-latency, high-bandwidth interconnects
A final complexity – memory is dynamic!
Memory isn’t just the static bits, but also activations! This can be big
A final complexity – activation memory
Thus far, we have only really discussed parameter memory.

Tensor and pipeline parallel can linearly reduce those..but what about activations?




                                                                          [Korthikanti et al 2022]
What’s the activation memory per layer?
Starting point: activation memory needed if storing everything




         𝑎𝑠
• The 5 terms come from the quadratic attention terms incl dropout
        ℎ
• As with flash attention, we can drop this term via recomputation
Activation under tensor parallel




Tensor parallel splits out the matrix multiplies in attention + MLP

The remaining 10 term is for the LayerNorm (4sbh), Dropout (2sbh), and inputs to the
attention and MLP (4sbh). These terms alone will continue to grow with size
Making memory truly linear – sequence parallel




Observation: all the 10sbh terms are pointwise ops over the sequence
   … so split up the layer norm/dropout layers along the sequence axis.
• In the forward pass, ‘𝑔’ is an all gather, ‘ ത
                                              𝑔’ is reduce-scatter
• In the backward pass, the two are reversed.
Making activation memory fully scale with more machines
Putting it together to get full linear scaling for memory.
Other parallelism strategies

Context parallel / Ring attention
   (split activations across GPUs
   in a long sequence)




Expert parallel
   (split experts across GPUs)
 Recap: LLM parallelism table..
 What are each of the parallelism primitives good for?

                 Sync             Memory       Bandwidth            Batch size Easy to
                 overhead                                                      use?
DDP/ZeRO1        Per-batch        No           2* # param           Linear     Very
                                  scaling
FSDP             3x Per-FSDP      Linear       3 * # param          Linear     Very
(ZeRO3)          block
Pipeline         Per-pipeline     Linear       Activations          Linear     NO
Tensor+seq       2x transformer Linear         8*activations per- No impact No
                 block                         layer all-reduce

           Have to balance limited resource – memory, bandwidth, batch size
Model vs Tensor parallel (TPU book)




        Key quantity
Global batch size (divided by GPU)
 ‘3D parallelism’ – putting it all together
Simple rules of thumb from the literature.

1. Until your model fits in memory..
   • Tensor parallel up to GPUs / machine
   • Pipeline parallel across machines
   › (Or use Zero-3, depending on BW)

2. Then until you run out of GPUs
    • Scale the rest of the way with data parallel

If your batch size is small.. gradient accumulate to trade higher
batch sizes for better communication efficiency.
Scaling strategies from Narayanan 2021



                                                                                     DP size

                                                                                       32
                                                                                       32
                                                                                       32
                                                                                       32
                                                                                       32
                                                                                       32
                                                                                       24
                                                                                       15
                                                                                       9
                                                                                       6

Notes
- Tensor parallel first up to 8, then caps out at 8.
- Pipeline parallel goes up to make the model fit.
- Dara parallel gradually decreases with scale, with the largest model having DP=6
Careful ‘3D’ parallelism gives linear gains




                   More GPUS, same, flat utilization!
Tensor parallel = 8 is often optimal




When parallelizing across 64 machines – it’s best to use a 8 x 8 configuration.
Activation recomputation can pay for itself (via memory)




Activation recomputation enables larger batches, improving throughput (t=8, p=16)
Recent LMs – what do they do?




            Dolma – 7B model, FDSP (probably fits intra-node)
DeepSeek




DeepSeek – ZeRO stage 1 with Tensor, Sequence, and Pipeline parallel
V3 – PP (16), EP (64-way, 8 nodes), ZeRO stage 1
Yi




Yi - ZeRO stage 1 + Tensor + Pipeline parallel
Yi-lightning (2025) – Tensor replaced by Expert parallelism
Llama3 405B



              (Stage 1, small bsz training, Stage 2 pretraining, Stage 3 long-context)
Llama 3 405B
Side note – Lots of GPU failures at this scale!
Gemma 2

     For 2, 9, 27B models

    ZeRO-3, MP (=TP+SP), DP
Recap for the whole lecture


❖ Scaling beyond a certain point requires multi-gpu, multi-node parallelism




❖ No single solution to the parallelism problem (probably want all 3 approaches)




❖ Simple, interpretable rules of thumb for combining different forms of parallelism
