            Lecture 11
S C A L I N G – C A S E ST U D Y A N D D E TA I LS


                     CS336
Motivation today


          What is the best practices for scaling and hparam tuning LMs?




•   Does chinchilla’s approach to scaling actually work?

•   Can we save compute when training and fitting these things?

•   Should we be picking particular architectures / parametrizations to scale nicely?
      Scaling in practice
      The newest model we talked about with scaling details - 2022




What about more recently?




                         2023                                        2024
                                                          2024



                                                         2024        2025
                         2024
Maximum update parametrization – in depth
Recall – the maximum update parametrization makes appealing claims




           Scale-invariant hyperparameter tuning would be very nice.
                 How does it work, and does it work in practice?
Recent models with detailed, public scaling recipes

1. Cerebras-GPT




2. MiniCPM




3. DeepSeek
CerebrasGPT
CerebrasGPT – 0.1 to 13B models trained with the Chinchilla recipe.




Core finding – using muP parametrization makes scaling more stable
Hyperparam scaling strategy
Cerebras GPT authors find more predictable scaling from muP parametrization
muP parametrization
Appendix contains a very clear set of differences in parametrizing the model for scaling
Setting the empirical values
muP is combined with aggressive scaling for hyperparameter optimization.




Generally stable hyperparameters.
MiniCPM
MiniCPM (2024) – new small, high-perf LM from Tsinghua group.




Careful, extensive scaling computations + muP to stabilize and simplify scaling
MiniCPM
High performance 1-2.5 B parameter models. These models beat most out 2Bs and
   match many modern 7B models.
Techique 1: muP to stabilize scaling
Scale_emb = 12, scale_depth = 1.4, init_std = 0.1, lr =0.01




              c.f. CerebrasGPT – Scale_emb = 10, lr=6e-3, init_base = 0.08
Scaling recipe / strategy
Use muP for initialization, fix the aspect ratio, scale up the overall model size.




Note that the gap between the largest model here and the actual model they train is ~5x


              Optimal batch, LR, token-to-size ratios are directly fitted via scaling analysis
 Optimal batch
 Three model sizes (9m, 30m, 170m) as a function of data size (y), batch (x) and loss (col)




Vertical columns of points represent a single training curve (fixed batch, more points).

Red line attempts to identify minimum loss points for each y-value
   – this is the ‘optimal batch size’ for a model size / dataset size combination.
Optimal batch size
We can then follow the Kaplan 2020 analysis and plot optimal batch size vs final loss.




Fairly clean trend – polynomially increase the batch size as loss decreases.
Optimal LR
According to muP – optimal learning rate should be (roughly) stable. Is it?
What remains – model size vs data tradeoffs.
From chinchilla – to fit a scaling law, we need to train from scratch, not just early stop




This turns the cost of fitting a scaling law from n to n^2.. Can we avoid this?
(partial) solution in miniCPM – WSD learning rate
 Instead of cosine, split learning rate into warmup, stable, and decay phases.




For chinchilla-style analysis, can restart the run at the end of the stable phase.
WSD learning rates work well in miniCPM
Slower during the stable phase, rapid loss decay during decay phase. Decay ~ 10%.
Side note – other ways of estimating chinchilla curves
Gadre et al propose other, curve-fitting based ways of doing similar things




    Core idea – the ‘penalty’
    from overtraining remains stable
Chinchilla-type analysis
Equipped with the WSD learning rate,
we can now try to find the optimal data-to-model size ratio




MiniCPM authors choose method 1 (lower envelope) and method 3 (joint fit)
Chinchlla method 1
Fairly clear (though maybe not linear?) trends




Different colors indicate different models. Their runs suggest relatively low diminishing
    returns due to data.
Chinchilla method 3
Their primary scaling approach is the joint fit – they find very high data-model ratios.
Tiny models with lots of data
The overall data-to-model ratio is very high (192), though they argue LLaMA
   architectures should have a higher ratio.




Note that recent models like LLaMA 3 has significantly higher data-to-model ratios,
   suggesting that with more careful optimization, we might be able to go far beyond
   the 20*model_size rule of thumb.
Scaling curve fits are (generally) good
Overall fits and predictions of models across a large range of sizes is fairly good.




X-axis, number of tokens in billions.
DeepSeek
DeepSeek (2024) – another LM with careful scaling analysis




7 and 67B param models – generally high performance compared to other open LM
 DeepSeek




Performance - Roughly comparable to LLaMA 2 models of equivalent size.
Scaling strategy – batch + LR
Scaling strategy: don’t use any muP, directly estimate optimal batch / LR
Scaling analysis of learning rates
Small scale runs + collect ‘near optimal’ (within 0.25% of min) models.




Learning rate fit looks a bit questionable..
 For chinchilla analysis: WSD-style learning rate
 Deepseek uses WSD-style learning rate – fast warmup + two decay steps of 10% each.




Generally seems to match performance of cosine learning rates.
Data-size tradeoff analysis: Chinchilla method 2
Straightforward isoflop-style analysis for selecting the model size tradeoffs.
Scaling predicts final model loss
The fitted scaling models (generally) accurately predict the final model losses.
LLaMA 3 (2024) Scaling laws




Isoflops-style scaling (39-1 ratio)   Compute-to-downstream scaling
Hunyuan-1 (2024) large scaling laws
Yet more isoflops-style scaling (but this time for MoE parameter sizes)




                            Optimal ratio – 96-1 (data to active param)
MiniMax-01 (2025)
Architecture scaling laws + Chinchilla method 1
Recent scaling law recipes
CerebrasGPT
•   Use muP to make hyperparams invariant to scale
•   Directly use the chinchilla scaling formula

DeepSeek recipe
• Assume most transformer hypers are invariant to scale
• Do a scaling analysis on batch / LR to figure out optimal scaling
• IsoFLOP analysis to figure out model sizing
    ›   Use a piecewise-linear schedule to make chinchilla scaling cheap.

miniCPM recipe
• Use muP to make transformer + LR invariant to scale
• Use a piecewise linear schedule to get sample for Chinchilla method 3 (curve fitting)

                                     Recent (late 2024+) but less detailed
LLaMA 3 / Hunyuan
• Just isoflops (no other scaling details)
Minimax
• Architecture choice / decision scaling
Validating and understanding muP
“Scale invariant” hyperparameter tuning would be very useful




CerebrasGPT and miniCPT also use muP – is it actually useful?
   What is muP, anyway?




                                                     (this is a very accessible ‘muP for babies’ paper)



muP is based off the following assertion. As a function of the width of the network 𝑛𝑙 ..

A1: The activations at initialization should remain Θ(1)
A2: After one gradient step, the change in activation should be Θ(1)


        Note: if individual activations are Θ(1), then the norm should be Θ                 nl
Deriving muP (condition A1)
Suppose that we have a simple, deep linear network (ℎ𝑙 = 𝑊𝑙 ℎ𝑙−1 ) and we init
𝑊𝑙 ∼ 𝑁 0, 𝜎𝐼𝑛𝑙 ×𝑛𝑙−1 then by basic matrix concentration 𝑊𝑙 ∗ → 𝜎( 𝑛𝑙−1 + 𝑛𝑙 ) and,

                                            ℎ𝑙 2 ≈ 𝑊𝑙 ∗ ℎ𝑙−1 2
                         𝑛𝑙                       −1             1                  𝑛𝑙
Now let’s pick 𝜎 =                𝑛𝑙 + 𝑛𝑙−1            =Θ            min      1,            . What happens?
                        𝑛𝑙−1                                    𝑛𝑙−1               𝑛𝑙−1



Inductive assumption- ℎ𝑙−1 2 = Θ                    𝑛𝑙−1
                                                                𝑛𝑙
Inductive case - 𝑊𝑙 ∗ → 𝜎               𝑛𝑙−1 + 𝑛𝑙 =
                                                               𝑛𝑙−1


                                            ℎ𝑙 2 = 𝑛𝑙 + 𝑜( 𝑛𝑙 )


     [Comments – the ≈ here is a bit hand-wavy, as the min s.v. of a Gaussian is 𝑛𝑙 − 𝑛𝑙−1 − 1, and is non-uniform, like J.L.]
Deriving muP (condition A2)
Now we need to deal with updates. Suppose we have the update Δ𝑊𝑙 on the weights.
For SGD, on a linear layer, this looks like a rank-one loss-activation outer product.

                                                   ⊤
                                  Δ𝑊𝑙 = −𝜂𝑙 ∇ℎ𝑙 ℓ ℎ𝑙−1


Thus, Δ𝑊𝑙 ℎ𝑙−1 2 = Δ𝑊𝑙 ∗ ℎ𝑙−1 2 . Now note that we have the update

                         Δhl = Wl Δℎ𝑙−1 + Δ𝑊𝑙 (ℎ𝑙−1 + Δℎ𝑙−1 )

Assuming that the leading order terms don’t cancel, we see that
• Wl Δℎ𝑙−1 = Θ( 𝑛𝑙 ) from induction assumption + condition A1 argument
                                                               𝒏𝒍
•   Δ𝑊𝑙 ℎ𝑙−1 = 𝛥𝑊𝑙 ∗ 𝑛𝑙−1 from above, thus 𝜟𝑾𝒍 ∗ = 𝚯
                                                              𝒏𝒍−𝟏
•   Δ𝑊𝑙 Δℎ𝑙−1 = 𝑂( Δ𝑊𝑙 ∗ 𝑛𝑙−1 )
Deriving muP (condition A2) part 2
Recall – we want all 3 terms of Δhl = Wl Δℎ𝑙−1 + Δ𝑊𝑙 (ℎ𝑙−1 + Δℎ𝑙−1 ) to be Θ( 𝑛𝑙 )
And the key is to pick LR such that Δ𝑊𝑙 ∗ 𝑛𝑙−1 = Θ 𝑛𝑙 . How can we do that?

Suppose that the loss update also scales O(1). Then we can write down..

          Δℓ = Θ Δ𝑊𝑙 , ∇𝑊𝑙 ℓ     =Θ     Δ𝑊𝑙 𝐹 ∇𝑊𝑙 ℓ       =Θ       Δ𝑊𝑙 ∗ ∇𝑊𝑙 ℓ
                                                      𝐹                           ∗


Where we use the fact that Δ𝑊𝑙 = −𝜂∇𝑊𝑙 ℓ in standard SGD updates.
                                         𝑛𝑙                                𝑛𝑙−1
Now plug in Δℓ = O 1 , Δ𝑊𝑙 ∗ = Θ               to get that ∇𝑊𝑙 ℓ     =Θ
                                        𝑛𝑙−1                       ∗        𝑛𝑙
                                                               ⊤
Finally, from the previous slide, recall that Δ𝑊𝑙 = −𝜂𝑙 ∇ℎ𝑙 ℓ ℎ𝑙−1 and thus

                                                𝑛𝑙
                                      𝜂𝑙 = Θ
                                               𝑛𝑙−1
                                                            [with Adam, Δ𝑊𝑙 ∗ 𝑛𝑙−1 = Θ 1 ]
 muP mini recap..
 So, what is (baby) muP about? Controlling activations (and changes) via 𝑊 and Δ𝑊



                                                1                   𝑛𝑙
                    Initialization: Set to Θ        min       1,
                                               𝑛𝑙−1                𝑛𝑙−1
                                                        𝑛𝑙
                              Learning rates: Set to                (for Adam n
                                                                                  1
                                                                                      )
                                                       𝑛𝑙−1                   l−1




 Compared to ‘standard’ parametrizations – these set
                                                        1
                              Initialization: Set to
                                                       𝑛𝑙−1
                              Learning rates: Set to Θ(1)

Differences – LR changes for Adam, also init diffs when fanout 𝑛𝑙 < fanin
Implementation in Cerebras GPT
We now have the background to follow cerebrasGPT
Deeper dive into muP
Recall – muP is a scaling procedure for hyperparams (as a function of width)


                                                                      Embedding

                                                                      Attention params

                                                                      Input/output MLP MM

                                                                      Softmax linear
Scaling protocol in the work
Architecture – mostly similar to what’s in the class

Important limitation of the work: only width scaling
Replicating muP
Q1: Does muP work as claimed? When we scale widths, is optimal LR constant?
What is muP robust to?
Modern LMs have many components that deviate from muP’s theory

•   Activations – SwiGLU and squared relu
•   Batch sizes – Large / small
•   Initialization variations – zero attention, etc.
•   RMS norm gains
•   Exotic optimizers (Lion)
•   Regularizers

Which of these (if any) break muP?
What is muP robust to? Nonlinearities

SwiGLU, Squared ReLU have the same optimal LR (and both provide minor gains)
What is muP robust to? Batch size
Larger and smaller batches.
The original derivation doesn’t handle batch size considerations.
What is muP robust to? initialization
There are new initializations that are sometimes used
• SP Unembedding – This is the pre-softmax linear layer. 1/M (SP) vs 1/M^2 (muP)
• Zero Query – Set the query matrix to zero (so that all items get uniform attention)
What is muP not robust to? RMSnorm gain
In our arch – RMSNorm has learnable gains. This turns out to break muP




But these gains can be removed with little loss of perf..
What is muP not robust to? Exotic optimizers
There are other, exotic optimizers based on just gradient signs. Do they transfer?
 What is muP not robust to? – (strong) weight decay

What about strong (0.1) weight decay? – this is maybe the only significant muP failure
Is muP useful? At least to some extent..
Overall, muP generally seems useful – insofar that SP is quite a bit more unstable.




Current evidence suggests that muP parametrization / initialization may be easier to tune.
Recap: scaling in the wild
What are challenges in scaling ‘in practice’
1. Setting model arch hyperparameters ( width, etc)
2. Setting optimizer hyperparameters (LR, batch)
3. Compute needed to fit the big chinchilla sweep



Some solutions?
1. Assume stability (or use muP)
2. Search for optimal LR / batch in small scale, either keep fixed or predict scaling
3. Use alternative learning schedules (WSD-like)
