Lecture 15
RL H F / A LIGNMENT


       CS336
The class thus far
We’ve now covered pre-training, which gets you to GPT3.. But how do we get to instructGPT?
Instruction following is a remarkable form of control




                                Text example from [Bubeck et al 2023]
And what about safety and content moderation ?
Deployment to many users requires stronger control over outputs
Goal today: enable better, tighter controls over LM output


Pretraining data isn’t quite what we want (but it scales)..



     Can we collect data of behaviors we do want and train the LM?


1. What does that data look like?
2. How do we best make use of that data?
3. Do we need scale for this?
Where today’s lecture fits in
Standard approach – imitation (SFT) followed by reinforcement (‘RL’ HF)




                     Part 1: the ‘supervised finetuning’ part             [Ouyang 2022]
What are the ingredients in SFT?
The training data




The method
Training data
We’ve already seen some of the major types of instruction data..



Let’s talk about two more details about instruction tuning datasets

1. What’s actually inside these datasets?

2. What matters in building ‘high performance’ instruction tuning data?
Looking inside some instruction-tuning data
We’ll take a look at three datasets..

           FLAN                                  Oasst




                                        Alpaca
          FLAN – random examples

Stephanie - Can you finalize the attached and have it signed. I need to initial it, but it needs to be signed by
                                                                                                                                        Ronald Chisholm LOI
Brad Richter. Thanks. Write a subject line for this email.
Ahold to Sell Spain Operations to Permira (AP) AP - The Dutch supermarket retailer Ahold, seeking to streamline
global operations and reduce debt, said Sunday it will sell its holdings in Spain to Permira Funds for about                            Business
#36;849 million. What is this text about? OPTIONS: - World - Sports - Business - Science/Tech
Write highlights for this article: Sauntering down leafy avenues past typical Dutch step-gabled buildings, carpets of crocuses, the     The least known of the Dutch
occasional cyclist whooshing quietly by and the sun bouncing off the canal, I can think of few more pleasant places to spend a spring   cities, The Hague was a village
weekend than The Hague. […]The most prized Dutch colony was apparently run from The Hague (aka 'the Widow of Indonesia'). For
summer: the excellent Grapes & Olives and the Café de Bieb on Veenkade will have boats on a newly renovated bit of canal, with
                                                                                                                                        until 1806. It owes its growth to
music and boat trips planned, including a tour at the Kompaan brewery (I can vouch for the product). My art gorging finishes at the     Louis Bonaparte, Napoleon's
Panorama, an extraordinary, 14 ft-high circular panorama of The Hague's seaside resort, Scheveningen, painted by Hendrik Mesdag. I      brother, who ruled here. The
take a 15-minute tram to the place itself and gorge on scallops and sole at Catch by Simonis on the harbour front. The Hague has        city has a wealth of art,
netted a new fan. British Airways (0844 493 0787, www.ba.com) flies to Rotterdam Den Haag (half-hour taxi) from £100 return. For        including Vermeer's 'Girl With A
tours with Remco Dörr, email remco.dorr@hotmail.com. Double rooms at the Carlton Ambassador (00 31 70 363 0363,                         Pearl Earring'
www.carlton.nl/ambassador) cost from £84, room only. More information on travel in The Netherlands at www.holland.com.

                                                                                                                                        In the city centre there is a
                                                                                                                                        coffee shop with a
Here is some data about a restaurant: name = Aromi, eatType = coffee shop, food = English,                                              customer rating of 5 out of
customer rating = 5 out of 5, area = city centre. Write a sentence that includes the following data                                     5 called Aromi which serves
about a restaurant                                                                                                                      English food.
  Alpaca – random examples

                                       1.Eat a balanced diet and make sure to include plenty of fruits and
                                       vegetables. 2. Exercise regularly to keep your body active and strong. 3.
                                       Get enough sleep and maintain a consistent sleep schedule.
Give three tips for staying healthy.




                                       An algorithm is a step-by-step set of instructions used to solve a problem
                                       or achieve a goal. It is a process of breaking down complex tasks into
                                       smaller, more manageable steps. Algorithms can be used to find the
                                       shortest path from one place to another, sort data, or render data from an
                                       immense database in a few seconds.
What does “algorithm” mean?




                                       def avg_list(nums): total = 0 for n in nums: total += n return total /
                                       len(nums) print(avg_list([4, 3, 6, 10, 8])) # Output 6.4
Find the average number in a list.
        OpenAssistant – random examples

                                                                     "Monopsony" refers to a market structure where there is only one buyer for
                                                                     a particular good or service. In economics, this term is particularly relevant
                                                                     in the labor market, where a monopsony employer has significant power
                                                                     over the wages and working conditions of their employees. […]. Overall, the
Can you write a short introduction about the relevance of the term
                                                                     concept of monopsony is essential to understanding the dynamics of labor
"monopsony" in economics? Please use examples related to
                                                                     markets and the impact of market power on workers. Further research is
potential monopsonies in the labour market and cite relevant
                                                                     needed to understand the extent and impact of monopsonies on the
research.
                                                                     economy and to develop policies to address this issue. References: Bivens,
                                                                     J., & Mishel, L. (2013). The Pay of Corporate Executives and Financial
                                                                     Professionals as Evidence of Rents in Top 1 Percent Incomes. Journal of
                                                                     Economic Perspectives, 27(3), 57-78.
                                                                     There are many cheap and fun science projects that elementary school kids
                                                                     can do! Here are a few ideas: 1. Make a homemade lava lamp: Fill a clear
                                                                     plastic bottle with water and vegetable oil, add a few drops of food coloring,
                                                                     and then drop in an Alka-Seltzer tablet. The reaction will cause bubbles to
                                                                     rise and fall like a lava lamp. […]7. Create a solar oven: Using a pizza box,
My kid needs to do a science project for elementary school, what     aluminum foil, and plastic wrap, create a solar oven that can cook s'mores
are some cheap but fun projects to do?                               or other small snacks. 8. Explore magnets: Using magnets and a variety of
                                                                     objects, have your child experiment with magnetism to see what objects are
                                                                     attracted to magnets and which ones are not. These are just a few ideas to
                                                                     get you started! There are many more cheap and fun science projects that
                                                                     your child can do with household items and a little creativity.
Now let’s try our own annotation task..




        https://tinyurl.com/kuzx77u9


     Let’s annotate one example together! Please open this form
  Look at the response spreadsheet together
  FYI: This is the GPT-4o response..

CS336 is typically a course code for an upper-level computer science class, though the exact content can vary between
institutions. It often covers topics in software engineering, databases, computer graphics, or advanced algorithms,
depending on the curriculum of the specific university.

To determine if you should take CS336, consider the following:

Course Content: Look up the course syllabus or description to see what topics are covered. Does the content align with
your interests and career goals?
Prerequisites: Ensure you meet any prerequisites for the course. These could include introductory courses in computer
science or specific programming languages.
Professor: Research the professor teaching the course. Check reviews or ask upperclassmen about their teaching style
and the difficulty of their classes.
Course Load: Understand the workload and time commitment required. Upper-level CS courses can be demanding, so
consider how it fits with your other courses and commitments.
Career Goals: Think about how the course content aligns with your career aspirations. For example, if you're interested in
a career in software development or data science, a course on software engineering or databases could be beneficial.
If you provide more details about the specific institution or course content, I can give more tailored advice.
What did we notice across the datasets?

                 These datasets vary in many ways…

•   Length and bullet points (style variations)

•   References, other complex knowledge

                          Less visible, but important aspects..
•   Scale
•   Safety


               How do these factors affect the model?
Style variations in data and models
Models vary a lot in response length..




                                         [Wang+ 2023]
When evaluating by preferences, style matters.
We see very strong length effects (in both humans and GPT-based evaluations)




                                                                        [Dubois+ 2023]
What about benchmarks?
These factors are (mostly) not that relevant for other benchmark perfs
     References, complex knowledge, and factuality
     Consider this example from open assistant:


                                                                     "Monopsony" refers to a market structure where there is only one buyer for
                                                                     a particular good or service. In economics, this term is particularly relevant
                                                                     in the labor market, where a monopsony employer has significant power
                                                                     over the wages and working conditions of their employees. […]. Overall, the
Can you write a short introduction about the relevance of the term
                                                                     concept of monopsony is essential to understanding the dynamics of labor
"monopsony" in economics? Please use examples related to
                                                                     markets and the impact of market power on workers. Further research is
potential monopsonies in the labour market and cite relevant
                                                                     needed to understand the extent and impact of monopsonies on the
research.
                                                                     economy and to develop policies to address this issue. References: Bivens,
                                                                     J., & Mishel, L. (2013). The Pay of Corporate Executives and Financial
                                                                     Professionals as Evidence of Rents in Top 1 Percent Incomes. Journal of
                                                                     Economic Perspectives, 27(3), 57-78.


     What is this example teaching the model?
     1. Teaching the model about Bivens J & Mishel, L
     2. Teaching the model to output citations when asked to do so
                        (But by what mechanism? Does the model know about cites?)
Knowledge extraction and alignment
Folklore: Fine-tuning a model on ‘facts it doesn’t know’ makes it hallucinate




                                  [Schulman 2023]                           [Gekhman 2023]
Takeaways on knowledge extraction and alignment


1. You may not want to fine-tune on tail knowledge, even that’s the LM use case



2. In principle, ‘RL’ style correctness feedback could help



3. Knowledge storage and extraction in LMs is messy, and nuanced.
Safety
LMs are widely deployed to end-users, and need some safety controls

        Misinformation                              Scams and spam




                       [Goldstein+ 2023]                              [Kang+ 2023]
Safety-tuning
A bit of instruction tuning can drastically change safety profiles
Safety-tuning
The challenge is really to balance this with over-refusals
Safety-tuning with just a little data
Significant improvements to safety with ~500 samples.




                                  (Hate speech)             (Anthropic HH)




Adding 500 Alpaca-style examples makes models follow safety guidelines
Putting it together – SFT Data


1. Instruction fine-tuning (SFT) works works best when we are just extracting pre-
   training behaviors, not adding new ones



2. Adding (factually correct!) data can sometimes hurt



3. Small amounts of the right kinds of behavior (safety, instruction-following, style)
   make a big difference, but there is a long-tail that benefits from more data
How to fine-tune
Just do gradient descent..




In many academic settings – this is basically it. But what if..

      You have tons of compute and data, you want to scale up instruction tuning
Turning instruction tuning into pretraining


          Can we somehow turn instruction tuning data into pretraining data?

The following (increasingly popular) idea says yes:

1. Pre-train on web/pretraining data
2. Mix in instruction-tuning data into pre-training
3. Do an actual (but short) instruction-tuning round.



Lets you scale up instruction tuning w/o catastrophic forgetting
‘Midtraining’ / ‘Two-phase training’
The recipe is common knowledge among many LLM companies (but not documented)




      Widely used by most models today..
      Publicized in recent Chinese-derived LMs (miniCPM, jetMoE)
Where today’s lecture fits in
Standard approach – imitation (SFT) followed by reinforcement (‘RL’ HF)




                     Part 2: the ‘RL’ part                                [Ouyang 2022]
From imitation to optimization
Imitation (SFT)

             Fit 𝑝ො 𝑦 𝑥 ≈ 𝑝 ∗ (𝑦|𝑥) for some reference distribution 𝑝 ∗ 𝑦 𝑥

                           •    Pure generative modeling perspective
                          •    Requires samples from reference policy

Optimization (RLHF)

              Find 𝒑
                   ෝ 𝒚 𝒙 such that max 𝐸𝑝 [𝑅 𝑦, 𝑥 ] for a reward 𝑅(𝑦, 𝑥)
                                          𝑝


                  •    Maximize some reward function that we can measure
                      • LMs are policies, not a model of some distribution
       Why optimize? Costs
       Might be easier to get scalar feedback rather than optimal policy.
       Even for a tiny and simple 7B model..

                     Base model        Supervised learning        Pairwise feedback         RL   Evaluation
                                             (one time)


Compute cost           $300k                  $100                     $100               $100     $0

Annotation cost          $0                  $25k                       $4k                 $0    $50


                                   SFT data can be really expensive,
                  and there may be tasks that are much easier for experts to verify than solve

                   Most frontier model labs spend millions on the post-training data..
Why optimize? G-V gap
People don’t always write the thing that they prefer in LM outputs..




                              From: Zhang et al – “Benchmarking Large Language Models for News Summarization” 2023
Overview

We’ll cover three aspects of RLHF

Data
• How do people collect RLHF data?
• What are some things to worry about

How do we RLHF?
• PPO
• DPO

What are some side-effects of RLHF?
RLHF Data

What types of pairwise feedback. How do we get (good) pairwise feedback?
RLHF and data – standard setups
Standard ‘pairwise feedback’ setup
RLHF and data – instruct GPT guideline
Allegedly - google bard crowdsourcing instructions




                          https://assets.bwbx.io/documents/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/rqKqEqbXBnDI/v0
Crowdworker selection - instructGPT
Scale + Upwork – 40 workers.
Now let’s try our own annotation task
You will get 5 minutes to annotate 5 examples




                         https://tinyurl.com/w2tyr6xn
RLHF and data - crowdsourcing

                             Complexities of crowdsourcing



•   Hard to get really high-quality, verifiable annotators



•   Hard to get them to really check correctness



•   Have to be careful about GPT4 use..
RLHF and data – crowdsourcing ethics
Data collection at scale can have significant issues
RLHF and data - demographics
The annotator distribution for RLHF can significantly shift its behaviors




                                                                            [Santurkar+ 2023]
RLHF and style – annotators matter (a lot)
This is true even for many annotators – but not all annotators




                                                                 [Hosking, Blunsom, Bartolo 2024]
RLFH and data - LM-generated
GPT4 is a surprisingly good pairwise feedback system




 Near-perfect rank correlation at the system level   Agreement near human inter-annotator levels
RLHF and data - LM-generated
At the lower end of the cost+quality spectrum – AI feedback often used for RLHF
                   Ultrafeedback                                       Zephyr 7b




                                      Tulu3




 Used in e.g. Olmo, Zephyr, etc                 https://thesequence.substack.com/p/the-sequence-chat-hugging-faces-lewis
RLHF and data – Self-training




                                From Constitutional AI, Bai et al.
RLHF and style – Length effects
Length effects are a very significant outcome of RLHF




                   [Chen et al 2024]                    [Singhal et al 2024]
How do we RLHF?

We now have a (high quality) pairwise feedback data collection pipeline?



     How do we adapt the model to make use of pairwise feedback?


•   Part 1: PPO – the original and very finicky approach (the brief version)



•   Part 2: DPO – the new, very accessible approach
From imitation to optimization
Imitation (SFT)

             Fit 𝑝ො 𝑦 𝑥 ≈ 𝑝 ∗ (𝑦|𝑥) for some reference distribution 𝑝 ∗ 𝑦 𝑥

                           •    Pure generative modeling perspective
                          •    Requires samples from reference policy

Optimization (RLHF)

              Find 𝒑
                   ෝ 𝒚 𝒙 such that max 𝐸𝑝 [𝑅 𝑦, 𝑥 ] for a reward 𝑅(𝑦, 𝑥)
                                          𝑝


                  •    Maximize some reward function that we can measure
                      • LMs are policies, not a model of some distribution
PPO in language modeling
From InstructGPT




                           ..this is very innocuous looking
More details and background from Stiennon
From "Learning to summarize from human feedback”
PPO – at a conceptual level
A brief (and high level) intro to the various ideas in PPO..

Attempt 1: Policy gradients (variances are too high)
                         ∇𝜃 𝐸𝑝𝜃 𝑅 𝑧 = 𝐸𝑝𝜃 [R(z)∇𝜃 log 𝑝𝜃 𝑧 ]


Attempt 2: TRPO (Linearize the problem around the current policy)




Attempt 3: PPO (Clip the ratios at some eps)
Can we get rid of PPO?

Question for many: can we avoid doing any ‘RL’ ? (i.e. on-policy RL algorithms)

Some reasonable stuff people thought about

•   Train the model with a control token – (SFT on the pairs, prepend [GOOD] to chosen,
    [BAD] to not chosen)

•   Train the model on only preferred output

•   Train a reward model, get LM outputs, train on the preferred output

•   Train a reward model, get 1024 LM outputs, take the best one.
DPO – RLHF without tears?
Try to simplify PPO by..
• Getting rid of the reward model
• Getting rid of any on-policy stuff (rollouts, outer loops etc)



Instead
• Take gradient steps on log-loss of good stuff
• Take negative gradient steps on bad stuff (appropriately weighted).
DPO – derivation from the RLHF formula
Our goal is to optimize




Assume that the policy 𝜋 is the set of all policies (nonparametric assumption).
The maximizer is then,


 Solve for the ‘implied reward’




                                                   (This is the equivalence also used in the kimi-think paper)
DPO derivation 2
We can now optimize the implied reward as a reward model via the Stiennon objective

                                                                             and


This gives the DPO objective,




The key steps?
1. Make a nonparametric assumption (links 𝜋𝜃 and r in closed form)
2. Parametrize reward r via the policy
3. Optimize the reward using supervised losses (which in turn, optimizes the policy)
      Conceptually.. This is MLE on the pairwise rewards, under nonparametric assumption + alternative parametrization
DPO updates and components
In some sense, reduces to “pos gradient on good, neg gradient on bad”




                (Scaled by ‘prediction error’ of the implied reward model)
Results – controlled comparison in AF
Compared to our previous PPO implementation? Same perf (on sim) with no pain!
DPO works




From Chris Manning – Most ‘top open-source’ RLHF models are DPO’d
Variants
Lots of variants (too many variants), but maybe two of note from the Tulu 3 paper..
 SimPO (no ref)




 Length normalized DPO
But PPO does too (and sometimes better?)
The trickiness of RL-related empirical work..

      Lots of results are highly contingent (on the specifics of the experiment setup)
   Things to watch out for in RLHF

Overoptimization / overfitting on the reward   Mode collapse / entropy
Thins to watch out for - Overoptimization
Across many different RLHF-style optimizers. Optimizing for reward overfits past a point




  Holds true for human pref (left), noisy LM pref (mid) but not noiseless LM pref (right)
Things to watch out for - mode collapse
RLHF makes models no longer ‘probabilistic models’ – no calibration by default
Recap of the lecture

RLHF recap:

1. RLHF data collection is (also) hard! Many confounding factors



2. RLHF algorithms are a bit more complex than SFT – esp. PPO



3. Be mindful of the impact of (over) optimizing for rewards
