                       Lecture 16
R E I N FO RC E M E N T L E A RN I NG F RO M V E RI F I A BL E RE WA RD S


                                 CS336
(Remaining content from last lecture..)
DPO – RLHF without tears?
Try to simplify PPO by..
• Getting rid of the reward model
• Getting rid of any on-policy stuff (rollouts, outer loops etc)



Instead
• Take gradient steps on log-loss of good stuff
• Take negative gradient steps on bad stuff (appropriately weighted).
DPO – derivation from the RLHF formula
Our goal is to optimize




Assume that the policy 𝜋 is the set of all policies (nonparametric assumption).
The maximizer is then,


 Solve for the ‘implied reward’




                                                   (This is the equivalence also used in the kimi-think paper)
DPO derivation 2
We can now optimize the implied reward as a reward model via the Stiennon objective

                                                                             and


This gives the DPO objective,




The key steps?
1. Make a nonparametric assumption (links 𝜋𝜃 and r in closed form)
2. Parametrize reward r via the policy
3. Optimize the reward using supervised losses (which in turn, optimizes the policy)
      Conceptually.. This is MLE on the pairwise rewards, under nonparametric assumption + alternative parametrization
DPO updates and components
In some sense, reduces to “pos gradient on good, neg gradient on bad”




                (Scaled by ‘prediction error’ of the implied reward model)
Results – controlled comparison in AF
Compared to our previous PPO implementation? Same perf (on sim) with no pain!
DPO works




From Chris Manning – Most ‘top open-source’ RLHF models are DPO’d
Variants
Lots of variants (too many variants), but maybe two of note from the Tulu 3 paper..
 SimPO (no ref)




 Length normalized DPO
But PPO does too (and sometimes better?)
The trickiness of RL-related empirical work..

      Lots of results are highly contingent (on the specifics of the experiment setup)
   Things to watch out for in RLHF

Overoptimization / overfitting on the reward   Mode collapse / entropy
Thins to watch out for - Overoptimization
Across many different RLHF-style optimizers. Optimizing for reward overfits past a point




  Holds true for human pref (left), noisy LM pref (mid) but not noiseless LM pref (right)
Things to watch out for - mode collapse
RLHF makes models no longer ‘probabilistic models’ – no calibration by default
The class thus far
Pre-training + RLHF gets you to ~ GPT3.5… Today we’ll get all the way to o1/r1
The goal – expand the scope and power of RL
With RLHF: we can’t cleanly scale out due to overoptimization




Can we work in domains where RL excels? Where we optimize exactly what we want
     The lecture today

1. Core algorithms..



         PPO → GRPO      GRPO variants




2. Case studies
Recap: PPO in theory
A brief (and high level) intro to the various ideas in PPO..

Attempt 1: Policy gradients (variances are too high)
                         ∇𝜃 𝐸𝑝𝜃 𝑅 𝑧 = 𝐸𝑝𝜃 [R(z)∇𝜃 log 𝑝𝜃 𝑧 ]


Attempt 2: TRPO (Linearize the problem around the current policy)




Attempt 3: PPO (Clip the ratios at some eps)
PPO
Policy gradient method for optimizing rewards in actual RL tasks..




      From the PPO announcement blog (2017)           OpenAI Five (2019)
PPO – at a conceptual level
The objective is basically all there is to it at a conceptual level




                                           [From - https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/algorithms/ppo.html]
PPO in practice




   We
    You
      need
        know
           to look
             you’reatina for
                         livea bad time
                              implementation
                                        if there’s
                                                when
                                                   a blog
                                                       talking
                                                           post like
                                                               aboutthis..
                                                                      PPO
PPO – idealization (?) for language models
In the language model setting..




Pretty similar to the RL formulation. Actions operate over tokens, big dense reward at the very end operating on full sequenc e


                                                                                                      [From Zheng et al 2023]
PPO – let’s look at an implementation
Implementation – AlpacaFarm’s PPO




Used by several others to reasonable success
PPO in practice
PPO outer loop. Invoke an inner loop to optimize the loss over some rollouts.




   https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_farm/blob/30717ddae735365de756ee2085191b491a71788d/src/alpaca_farm/rl/ppo_trainer.py
PPO in practice – loss computation
AlpacaFarm code – loss computation. Pretty standard stuff.




                                                             Cliprange=0.2
PPO in practice – rollouts.
PPO in practice – reward shaping
High level – add per-token KL penalty, last-token full reward
In practice? Clip KL for sequences where new policy logp < reference logp




Helps with stability? If we blow up our model, this prevents kl from diverging
PPO in practice – generalized advantage estimate

  Instead of reward, we use advantages
                                                      where




  Funny detail – this is a bandit problem and gamma=lambda=1 works – this is the reward-to-go vs the value
What do you expect to see in PPO?


Increasing overall rewards       Incl. reward model           Negative KL rewards




          This is a bandit setting, you expect reasonable training curves
Why do we need yet another RL algorithm..?

Why not PPO?

•   In practice, complicated implementation
•   Value model (memory hungry, involves additional tuning for training)



Why not DPO?

•    Data not inherently pairwise (or in the form of Bradley -terry comparisons)
•    Offline (though could be made online by iterating)
New kid on the block: GRPO
What’s GRPO?
• Start with PPO (many parts are similar)
• Remove the value function / advantage computation
• Calculate the advantage as “z-score within group”




                                                                              (PPO for reference)




     In the online case (rollout+immediate update), this is just policy gradient with group normalized rewards
GRPO is very simple (thanks to lack of value function..)
You can (and people do) write tiny GRPO
   implementations



•   Compute reward for each rollout
•   Mean/Var normalization per group
•   Compute KL term
•   Gradient updates on the loss

We can walk through this example from
     https://github.com/McGill-NLP/nano-aha-moment
Advantage computation is also very simple..



Basically just the ‘vanilla’ GRPO setup.

   Main difference here is just the 1e-4
    stability factor in the std calculation
How well does it work?
GRPO from the original paper




               Outperforms RFT (reinforcing correct answers),
                 with some gains from process supervision


                        We will get back to this later..
Thinking carefully about the GRPO objective..
The key difference in GRPO vs PPO: the advantage




Is this good? A minor RL detour..




   Baselining: We can
    subtract any state-
 dependent term from our
         rewards




                                                   Sutton and Barto
GRPO doesn’t use a “valid” baseline
The division by the stdev term is not a valid baseline that preserves unbiasedness.

What is an unbiased-gradient version of GRPO?




Also note the modification on the length-normalizer term on the left..



                                              Liu et al 2025. (this gets pretty close to reinforce w/ leave-one-out)
Length biases of GRPO
What do these terms do? Stdev – upweights too easy or hard questions.
Length normalization:




What does the fix do?
Case studies
Let’s look at a few representative open models with RLVR.



                                     Deepseek R1
                                     Central to many recent RLVR efforts
                                     Lots of interesting details



                                     Kimi K1.5
                                     Contemporaneous to R1, RLVR
                                     Complementary details to R1


                                     Qwen 3
                                     Most recent open reasoning model attempt
                                     Low-data RLVR
Deepseek R1
The paper that launched a bit of a social phenomenon..




What’s remarkable about R1?
• Performance exceeding OpenAI O1
• Open RL recipe (that is also pretty simple)
    • Ended speculations on the necessity of MCTS/PRMs
• SFT insights (both R1-zero and distil-r1)
Algorithm - GRPO
They build on the results of GRPO from DeepSeekMath..




          But they do not use process supervision in R1 (more on this later..)
Controlled setting – R1 zero.
Setup:
     Rewards
     • Accuracy rewards (is it correct?)
     • Format rewards (use thinking tags)

     Data (not public)

     Base model: Deepseek-V3

Results: a bit worse than Openai O1
Interesting phenomena (?)




    Longer CoTs during training   ‘aha’ moment?
But maybe a bit overstated
From some follow-up analyses in Dr. GRPO..




  Length due to
 biased objective?




    Base model
 already has ‘aha’
 Pushing performance further – R1
 R1 vs R1-zero



 Key differences:
 • SFT initialization
 • Language consistency reward for CoT
 • Non-verifiable rewards (in stage 2)




Deepseek-V3           Reasoning SFT      RL (GRPO)   SFT/RLHF
SFT initialization..




 Start with plain ol (long) CoT, then maybe additional verification (vague)

• Claimed Benefit: interpretability
• Note: Origins on the data not quite clear..
SFT for reasoning / math..
Even a small number of samples is effective for bootstrapping reasoning from LMs




                 1k Math and science questions + Long CoTs from Gemini / r1
  RL step
  The RL part is basically the same..
  Minor difference: additional language consistency loss




The note on language switching is interesting.. RL naturally leads to mixed languages?
SFT/RLHF
The usual post-training process happens after RLVR / reasoning RL.

SFT step, 2 epochs.
   Reasoning data – non-verifiable tasks (‘write a proof of X’), use V3 as a judge (600k)
   Non-reasoning data – V3 SFT dataset (200k)



RLHF step
   Re-use R1-zero style reasoning RLHF in here
   Non-verifiable tasks - V3 RLHF pipeline. Still uses GRPO (for RLHF)
How well does R1 work?
It’s pretty good (but you knew that)
Distillation – can we get non-reasoning models to reason?
Pipeline
   Have R1 generate CoT traces (800k!)
   Teach Qwen 2.5 via distillation
  Other, relevant observations
  There is a whole unsuccessful attempts section



         PRMs
(PRM800k, DeepseekMath)




         MCTS
Kimi K1.5




Why do we study this one?
• Released at the same time as R1
• Also beats o1 using RL
Long COT reasoning strategy




Key steps
• Dataset construction (difficulty filtering)
• SFT (for long COT)
• RL (with their own policy gradient loss)
Data curation + SFT
Data curation
• Standard curation across math-style settings, balancing topics




•   Exclude multiple choice / true false (false positives)
•   Select only examples that models fail on best-of-8




SFT – little description, just described as ‘prompt engineering’ (distillation?)
Kimi RL
In kimi – reference based reward model, so the optimization problem is




RL algorithm inspired by DPO-type derivation.



                                                       (Nonparametric assumption + solve for r)




                                                               Use squared loss as a surrogate
Baselined policy gradient w/ regularization
Length control in Kimi
The kimi objective doesn’t have the same GRPO length bias problem.
   .. But they want to further compress the CoTs.


For each batch, they have a length reward




How should I interpret this?
• The lambda is in [0.5, -0.5], with longer sequences in a group being negative
• Correct answers are incentivized to be short
• Incorrect answers are incentivized to be shorter than the center of the range of rollouts
(They also only enable this later on in traning, due to its effects on perf)
Additional details
Curriculum
• Assign difficulty labels to dataset, go from easy to hard
• Sample problems proportional to (1-success_rate) to avoid repeating solved ones

Rewards
• For code – take problems with ground truth solutions, generate new test cases
• For math – 800k samples to train a CoT reward model for answer equivalence checks
RL Infra
Systems and utilization aspects of RL are very important.
Why is RL hard to make efficient?
• On policy = rollouts, which means (slow) inference
• Switching from training to rollouts often means different frameworks
• Long CoTs can make batches very uneven.
Kimi’s RL setup in detail
Scaling results
We already know this roughly matches / beats o1. Other interesting results..




                          For a small model on just the math data
Ablation / comparison to expert iteration




Could we avoid RL-style negative gradients and just learn from positives?
Final case study – Qwen 3




Better than o1 and R1 (though comes later)
.. But interesting scaling and data results
Overall picture




         RLHF comes after reasoning RL (like r1), distillation after that.
SFT + Reasoning RL


We know the playbook by now, and Qwen uses a lot of this..



•   Filtering for difficulty (by best-of-n, like kimi)
    • Remove things that the model gets right w/o CoT
    • Remove things too similar to validation data
•   Manual filtering for the quality of CoTs (guessing vs getting it right)
•   RL with GRPO on only 3995 examples
Qwen 3 specific new stuff.
Thinking mode fusion – controlling the length of the CoT.
1. Mix non-thinking and thinking data with tags




2. Early stopping termination via a special string
Test time scaling
Composition of the different stages




Note that math/stem abilities go down (a bit) with general purpose RLHF
Recap for today


Overoptimization is a problem.. RL in narrow domains is one solution



GRPO is simple (but with some flaws), and enables RLVR



Lots of successful recipes in the wild (R1, Kimi 1.5, Qwen3)
